The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Physiology of Marriage, Complete

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Physiology of Marriage, Complete

Author: Honoré de Balzac

Release date: July 4, 2005 [eBook #16205]
Most recently updated: November 22, 2016

Language: English

Credits: Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny, and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MARRIAGE, COMPLETE ***




Produced by John Bickers, and Dagny




THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MARRIAGE;

OR, THE MUSINGS OF AN ECLECTIC PHILOSOPHER

ON THE HAPPINESS AND UNHAPPINESS OF MARRIED LIFE


By Honore De Balzac




INTRODUCTION

“Marriage is not an institution of nature. The family in the east is
entirely different from the family in the west. Man is the servant of
nature, and the institutions of society are grafts, not spontaneous
growths of nature. Laws are made to suit manners, and manners vary.

“Marriage must therefore undergo the gradual development towards
perfection to which all human affairs submit.”

These words, pronounced in the presence of the Conseil d’Etat by
Napoleon during the discussion of the civil code, produced a profound
impression upon the author of this book; and perhaps unconsciously he
received the suggestion of this work, which he now presents to the
public. And indeed at the period during which, while still in his youth,
he studied French law, the word ADULTERY made a singular impression upon
him. Taking, as it did, a prominent place in the code, this word never
occurred to his mind without conjuring up its mournful train of
consequences. Tears, shame, hatred, terror, secret crime, bloody wars,
families without a head, and social misery rose like a sudden line of
phantoms before him when he read the solemn word ADULTERY!

Later on, when he became acquainted with the most cultivated circles of
society, the author perceived that the rigor of marriage laws was very
generally modified by adultery. He found that the number of unhappy
homes was larger than that of happy marriages. In fact, he was the first
to notice that of all human sciences that which relates to marriage was
the least progressive. But this was the observation of a young man; and
with him, as with so many others, this thought, like a pebble flung into
the bosom of a lake, was lost in the abyss of his tumultuous thoughts.

Nevertheless, in spite of himself the author was compelled to
investigate, and eventually there was gathered within his mind, little
by little, a swarm of conclusions, more or less just, on the subject of
married life. Works like the present one are formed in the mind of the
author with as much mystery as that with which truffles grow on the
scented plains of Perigord. Out of the primitive and holy horror which
adultery caused him and the investigation which he had thoughtlessly
made, there was born one morning a trifling thought in which his ideas
were formulated. This thought was really a satire upon marriage. It was
as follows:

A husband and wife found themselves in love with each other for the first
time after twenty-seven years of marriage.

He amused himself with this little axiom and passed a whole week in
delight, grouping around this harmless epigram the crowd of ideas which
came to him unconsciously and which he was astonished to find that he
possessed. His humorous mood yielded at last to the claims of serious
investigation. Willing as he was to take a hint, the author returned to
his habitual idleness. Nevertheless, this slight germ of science and of
joke grew to perfection, unfostered, in the fields of thought. Each
phase of the work which had been condemned by others took root and
gathered strength, surviving like the slight branch of a tree which,
flung upon the sand by a winter’s storm, finds itself covered at morning
with white and fantastic icicles, produced by the caprices of nightly
frosts. So the sketch lived on and became the starting point of myriad
branching moralizations. It was like a polypus which multiplies itself
by generation. The feelings of youth, the observations which a favorable
opportunity led him to make, were verified in the most trifling events
of his after life.

Soon this mass of ideas became harmonized, took life, seemed, as it
were, to become a living individual and moved in the midst of those
domains of fancy, where the soul loves to give full rein to its wild
creations. Amid all the distractions of the world and of life, the
author always heard a voice ringing in his ears and mockingly revealing
the secrets of things at the very moment he was watching a woman as she
danced, smiled, or talked. Just as Mephistopheles pointed out to Faust
in that terrific assemblage at the Brocken, faces full of frightful
augury, so the author was conscious in the midst of the ball of a demon
who would strike him on the shoulder with a familiar air and say to him:
“Do you notice that enchanting smile? It is a grin of hatred.” And then
the demon would strut about like one of the captains in the old comedies
of Hardy. He would twitch the folds of a lace mantle and endeavor to
make new the fretted tinsel and spangles of its former glory. And then
like Rabelais he would burst into loud and unrestrainable laughter, and
would trace on the street-wall a word which might serve as a pendant to
the “Drink!” which was the only oracle obtainable from the heavenly
bottle. This literary Trilby would often appear seated on piles of
books, and with hooked fingers would point out with a grin of malice two
yellow volumes whose title dazzled the eyes. Then when he saw he had
attracted the author’s attention he spelt out, in a voice alluring as
the tones of an harmonica, _Physiology of Marriage_!

But, almost always he appeared at night during my dreams, gentle as some
fairy guardian; he tried by words of sweetness to subdue the soul which
he would appropriate to himself. While he attracted, he also scoffed at
me; supple as a woman’s mind, cruel as a tiger, his friendliness was
more formidable than his hatred, for he never yielded a caress without
also inflicting a wound. One night in particular he exhausted the
resources of his sorceries, and crowned all by a last effort. He came,
he sat on the edge of the bed like a young maiden full of love, who at
first keeps silence but whose eyes sparkle, until at last her secret
escapes her.

“This,” said he, “is a prospectus of a new life-buoy, by means of which
one can pass over the Seine dry-footed. This other pamphlet is the
report of the Institute on a garment by wearing which we can pass
through flames without being burnt. Have you no scheme which can
preserve marriage from the miseries of excessive cold and excessive
heat? Listen to me! Here we have a book on the _Art_ of preserving
foods; on the _Art_ of curing smoky chimneys; on the _Art_ of making
good mortar; on the _Art_ of tying a cravat; on the _Art_ of carving
meat.”

In a moment he had named such a prodigious number of books that the
author felt his head go round.

“These myriads of books,” says he, “have been devoured by readers; and
while everybody does not build a house, and some grow hungry, and others
have no cravat, or no fire to warm themselves at, yet everybody to some
degree is married. But come look yonder.”

He waved his hand, and appeared to bring before me a distant ocean where
all the books of the world were tossing up and down like agitated waves.
The octodecimos bounded over the surface of the water. The octavos as
they were flung on their way uttered a solemn sound, sank to the bottom,
and only reappeared after a long interval. The quartos, more heavily
weighted, seemed like reefs beaten by the waves. The folios were like
islands round which the lighter volumes sported. Everything was tossing
about, everything was murmuring, everything was breaking against the
shore. The author perceived that this ocean was the ocean of ages, and
that human thought was cast into it.

“Do you not see,” said the demon, “that there is not a single book on
marriage? The moralists have doubtless forgotten to write one. Courage,
then! Seize that vacant place in the domain of thought. Go, tell men the
truth about marriage.”

He spoke, and disappeared without awaiting a reply, like the editors of
newspapers who care nothing for the ideas which they suggest to others.

I awoke. I thought the vision strange. I wrote the _Physiology of
Marriage_.




PART FIRST

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS


MEDITATION I

THE SUBJECT


If we consider the question from a certain height, must we not admit
that society, taken as a whole, presents a truly remarkable spectacle?

Man is born, grows up, lives and dies in submission to certain laws. He
learns from infancy to bend his will to them. He reaches manhood, and
fancy leads him to form ties which nature has made necessary, which laws
encourage, and which social manners render attractive. He marries.

Society then imposes upon him certain duties from which nothing can
release him. He must nourish, bring up and establish his children.

But whatever may be the burden which the accomplishment of these duties
lays upon him, society does not leave him to himself. It sustains him by
the power of opinion, by the encouragement of public spirit, and by the
interest which everybody takes in the performance of a task which is
universal.

He grows old, and society restores to him all that he has done for it.
His children surround him with loving care; they render back to him in
his decline the sustenance which he gave them in their infancy; they
smooth his path towards the tomb, just as he had guided their first
steps in life.

This picture of human society is certainly attractive; but is it true?

Let us not fear to analyze the elements of this vast scene, and to
examine closely the particular springs which move each object that
contributes to the general effect.

All men submit to the laws; but some evade them, while others violate
them. All men get married; but some find this a burden, while others
find it a pleasure.

All men have children; but there are some who would be glad to have
none, and others who do not know who are their children.

All men die; but some die sooner, and others later than they would wish.

In short, the duties, the burdens, the pleasures, the rewards, are not
so equally distributed as might be supposed at first sight.

If we examine more closely still the elements of society, we shall
perceive that there are men who, without violating the laws, know how
to make them yield to their own advantage; that there are others who,
without departing from the path of honor, know how to make a source of
pleasure out of what is to others a burden; that there are some who,
without lacking natural affection, know how to transfer to others the
care of bringing up their children; and finally, that there are those
who know how to find in the weaknesses of their fellow-creatures the
secret of their own strength.

These men constitute an aristocracy. They are the knowing ones.

But since this book is not a general treatise on society, let us confine
ourselves to the subject which it proposes to discuss.

Let us admit that marriage is the basis of society. Let us admit that it
is a burden which must be borne, a duty which must be fulfilled, a tax
which must be paid. Let us admit that it is a pleasure which must be
enjoyed, a reward which must be gained, a source of happiness which must
be rightly understood.

Let us admit that marriage is all this; but let us also admit that there
are some who know how to make the burden light, the duty easy, the tax
small, the pleasure keen, the reward ample, and the happiness complete.

These are the knowing ones in marriage.

This book is dedicated to them.


MEDITATION II

CONJUGAL WELL-BEING


Man is not born wicked. He becomes wicked, just as he becomes sick.

Society has developed his vices, just as the atmosphere develops
miasma.

Society has perfected man; but the perfection towards which society
tends, corrupts man.

Society is nature perfected; but nature perfected is corruption.

Civilization is the sublime aspect of society; but civilization is the
most active cause of corruption.

These paradoxes are only apparent. The following reflections will
explain them.

Man is composed of soul and body. The soul is the seat of the will, the
body is the seat of the passions.

The will is the faculty by which man directs his actions. The passions
are the impulses which lead him to act.

The will is developed by reason. The passions are developed by instinct.

Reason is the calculation of pleasures. Instinct is the choice of
pleasures.

The object of society is to procure for man the sum total of happiness
which he can enjoy.

The object of government is to direct the actions of man towards this
end.

The object of laws is to establish the rules according to which man
ought to act.

The object of morality is to teach man how he ought to direct his
actions.

The object of religion is to reveal to man the final end of his actions.

All these principles are summed up in one: the pursuit of happiness.

Happiness consists in the equilibrium between the will and the passions.

Equilibrium is the state in which the forces which compose a body are
balanced in such a way that the body remains at rest.

Rest is the state in which a body offers no resistance to the forces
which tend to move it.

In the state of equilibrium, man is happy. He has no desires, or his
desires are satisfied.

In the state of rest, man is unhappy. He has no desires, or his desires
are not satisfied.

The pursuit of happiness is the tendency of the will towards the
equilibrium of the passions.

The pursuit of pleasure is the tendency of the passions towards the
satisfaction of desires.

Society, government, laws, morality, religion, all tend to establish
the equilibrium between the will and the passions.

Civilization, which is the development of society, tends to disturb this
equilibrium.

Civilization has multiplied the desires of man. It has created new
pleasures, new needs, new sensations.

Civilization has refined the senses, sharpened the appetites, stimulated
the passions.

Civilization has given man arts, sciences, letters, luxury, fashion,
taste, coquetry, gallantry, love.

Civilization has made man more sensitive, more impressionable, more
voluptuous.

Civilization has corrupted man.

But civilization has also developed reason. It has taught man to
calculate his pleasures, to choose among his desires, to direct his
actions.

Civilization has given man philosophy, criticism, analysis, synthesis,
induction, deduction.

Civilization has made man more intelligent, more reflective, more
master of himself.

Civilization has perfected man.

Thus civilization has at the same time corrupted and perfected man.

It has corrupted him by multiplying his desires. It has perfected him by
developing his reason.

It has disturbed the equilibrium between his will and his passions. It
has rendered the pursuit of happiness more difficult.

Marriage is one of the institutions of society. It is subject to the
same laws.

Marriage is the union of a man and a woman, sanctioned by law, morality,
and religion.

The object of marriage is the procreation of children, the education of
families, the transmission of property, the stability of society.

The object of marriage is also the happiness of the individuals who
contract it.

Marriage ought to establish the equilibrium between the will and the
passions of the husband and wife.

Marriage ought to render the pursuit of happiness easier for them.

But civilization has disturbed the equilibrium of marriage, just as it
has disturbed the equilibrium of society.

Civilization has multiplied the desires of the husband and wife. It has
created new pleasures, new needs, new sensations for them.

Civilization has refined their senses, sharpened their appetites,
stimulated their passions.

Civilization has given them arts, sciences, letters, luxury, fashion,
taste, coquetry, gallantry, love.

Civilization has made them more sensitive, more impressionable, more
voluptuous.

Civilization has corrupted marriage.

But civilization has also developed the reason of the husband and wife.
It has taught them to calculate their pleasures, to choose among their
desires, to direct their actions.

Civilization has given them philosophy, criticism, analysis, synthesis,
induction, deduction.

Civilization has made them more intelligent, more reflective, more
masters of themselves.

Civilization has perfected marriage.

Thus civilization has at the same time corrupted and perfected marriage.

It has corrupted it by multiplying the desires of the husband and wife.
It has perfected it by developing their reason.

It has disturbed the equilibrium between their will and their passions.
It has rendered the pursuit of conjugal well-being more difficult.

Conjugal well-being consists in the equilibrium between the will and the
passions of the husband and wife.

This equilibrium is the state in which the desires of the husband and
wife are satisfied, or in which they have no desires.

This equilibrium is rare. It is the privilege of certain souls, the
result of certain circumstances, the effect of certain calculations.

This equilibrium is the object of the science of marriage.

This science is the art of rendering the pursuit of conjugal well-being
easier.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION III

OF THE HONEYMOON


There is a charming period in the life of every woman, during which she
is exercising a despotic sway over the heart of a man who adores her.
This period is the honeymoon.

It is a period of illusions, of dreams, of enchantments. It is a period
of poetry, of music, of flowers. It is a period of smiles, of tears, of
kisses.

It is a period when everything is beautiful, everything is good,
everything is true. It is a period when the sky is always blue, the sun
is always bright, the birds are always singing.

It is a period when the woman is a queen, an angel, a goddess. It is a
period when the man is a king, a hero, a god.

It is a period when love is a religion, marriage is a sacrament,
happiness is a duty.

This period is short. It lasts a month, a week, a day. Sometimes it does
not last at all.

Why is this period so short? Why does it end so soon? Why does it
sometimes not even begin?

It is because marriage is a reality, and the honeymoon is an illusion.

It is because marriage is a prose, and the honeymoon is a poetry.

It is because marriage is a calculation, and the honeymoon is an
enthusiasm.

It is because marriage is a duty, and the honeymoon is a pleasure.

It is because marriage is a yoke, and the honeymoon is a liberty.

It is because marriage is a chain, and the honeymoon is a garland.

It is because marriage is a prison, and the honeymoon is a paradise.

Marriage is the tomb of love. The honeymoon is the funeral procession.

But is it necessary that marriage should be the tomb of love? Is it
necessary that the honeymoon should be the funeral procession?

Cannot marriage be the cradle of love? Cannot the honeymoon be the
nuptial song?

Cannot marriage be the continuation of the honeymoon? Cannot the
honeymoon be the prelude of marriage?

Cannot the husband and wife prolong the illusions, the dreams, the
enchantments of the first days?

Cannot they preserve the poetry, the music, the flowers of the first
weeks?

Cannot they retain the smiles, the tears, the kisses of the first
months?

Cannot they keep the sky always blue, the sun always bright, the birds
always singing?

Cannot the woman remain a queen, an angel, a goddess? Cannot the man
remain a king, a hero, a god?

Cannot love remain a religion, marriage a sacrament, happiness a duty?

Yes, it is possible. It is difficult, but it is possible.

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches how to prolong the honeymoon, how to make marriage
the continuation of the honeymoon, how to make the honeymoon the prelude
of marriage.

This science teaches how to preserve the illusions, the dreams, the
enchantments. It teaches how to cultivate the poetry, the music, the
flowers.

This science teaches how to retain the smiles, the tears, the kisses. It
teaches how to keep the sky always blue, the sun always bright, the
birds always singing.

This science teaches how the woman can remain a queen, an angel, a
goddess. It teaches how the man can remain a king, a hero, a god.

This science teaches how love can remain a religion, marriage a
sacrament, happiness a duty.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION IV

OF THE FIRST SYMPTOMS


The honeymoon is over. The illusions are dissipated. The dreams are
vanished. The enchantments are broken.

The poetry is silent. The music is mute. The flowers are faded.

The smiles are rare. The tears are frequent. The kisses are cold.

The sky is gray. The sun is veiled. The birds are flown.

The woman is no longer a queen, an angel, a goddess. She is a woman.

The man is no longer a king, a hero, a god. He is a man.

Love is no longer a religion. Marriage is no longer a sacrament.
Happiness is no longer a duty.

Love is a habit. Marriage is a contract. Happiness is an accident.

The husband and wife begin to know each other. They begin to see each
other as they are.

They discover faults, weaknesses, imperfections. They experience
disappointments, disillusions, regrets.

They feel boredom, indifference, coldness. They suffer from quarrels,
disputes, reproaches.

They seek distractions, pleasures, consolations outside of marriage.

They commit infidelities, adulteries, separations.

This is the common fate of marriages. This is the natural course of
things.

But is it necessary that this should be the fate of all marriages? Is it
necessary that this should be the course of all things?

Cannot the husband and wife prevent the dissipation of illusions, the
vanishing of dreams, the breaking of enchantments?

Cannot they revive the poetry, the music, the flowers?

Cannot they multiply the smiles, dry the tears, warm the kisses?

Cannot they clear the sky, unveil the sun, recall the birds?

Cannot the woman remain charming, attractive, desirable? Cannot the man
remain amiable, attentive, devoted?

Cannot love remain a passion? Cannot marriage remain a happiness?
Cannot happiness remain a reality?

Yes, it is possible. It is difficult, but it is possible.

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches how to prevent the first symptoms of conjugal
unhappiness. It teaches how to recognize them, how to combat them, how
to cure them.

This science teaches how to maintain the charm, the attraction, the
desire. It teaches how to cultivate the amiability, the attention, the
devotion.

This science teaches how to keep love a passion, marriage a happiness,
happiness a reality.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION V

OF CONJUGAL POLITENESS


Politeness is the flower of humanity. He who is not polite enough, is
not human enough.

Politeness is the expression of respect for others. It is the
recognition of their rights, their merits, their dignity.

Politeness is the oil which lubricates the wheels of society. It renders
intercourse easy, agreeable, harmonious.

Politeness is the charm which attracts, the bond which unites, the grace
which adorns.

Politeness is especially necessary in marriage. It is the safeguard of
love, the preservative of happiness, the guarantee of peace.

Conjugal politeness is the constant attention which the husband and wife
pay to each other. It is the delicate care which they take of each
other’s feelings, tastes, habits.

Conjugal politeness is the art of pleasing each other, of serving each
other, of anticipating each other’s wishes.

Conjugal politeness is the habit of saying agreeable things, of doing
obliging actions, of showing affectionate sentiments.

Conjugal politeness is the respect for the personality of the other. It
is the recognition of his or her independence, liberty, individuality.

Conjugal politeness is the tolerance of faults, the indulgence for
weaknesses, the patience with imperfections.

Conjugal politeness is the forgiveness of offenses, the forgetfulness of
wrongs, the reconciliation after quarrels.

Conjugal politeness is the confidence, the sincerity, the loyalty which
the husband and wife show to each other.

Conjugal politeness is the modesty, the reserve, the decency which they
observe towards each other.

Conjugal politeness is the fidelity, the constancy, the devotion which
they promise and keep to each other.

Conjugal politeness is rare. Husbands and wives often neglect it. They
think that familiarity dispenses with it.

They become negligent, rude, disrespectful towards each other. They lose
the habit of pleasing, serving, anticipating each other.

They say disagreeable things, do disobliging actions, show indifferent
sentiments.

They violate the personality of the other. They disregard his or her
independence, liberty, individuality.

They are intolerant of faults, indulgent for their own weaknesses,
impatient with imperfections.

They remember offenses, harbor wrongs, prolong quarrels.

They lack confidence, sincerity, loyalty towards each other.

They lose modesty, reserve, decency towards each other.

They commit infidelities, inconstancies, betrayals towards each other.

This neglect of conjugal politeness is one of the principal causes of
conjugal unhappiness.

It chills love, destroys happiness, disturbs peace.

It creates boredom, indifference, coldness. It provokes quarrels,
disputes, reproaches.

It leads to distractions, pleasures, consolations outside of marriage.

It causes infidelities, adulteries, separations.

How can conjugal politeness be maintained? How can it be cultivated?
How can it be perfected?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the rules, the principles, the secrets of conjugal
politeness.

This science teaches how to please, serve, anticipate each other. It
teaches how to say agreeable things, do obliging actions, show
affectionate sentiments.

This science teaches how to respect the personality of the other. It
teaches how to recognize his or her independence, liberty,
individuality.

This science teaches how to tolerate faults, indulge weaknesses, be
patient with imperfections.

This science teaches how to forgive offenses, forget wrongs, reconcile
after quarrels.

This science teaches how to maintain confidence, sincerity, loyalty.

This science teaches how to observe modesty, reserve, decency.

This science teaches how to preserve fidelity, constancy, devotion.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION VI

OF THE CUSTOM-HOUSE


Every evening, on returning home, the husband passes through a moral
custom-house.

His wife is the custom-house officer. She inspects him, searches him,
questions him.

She wants to know where he comes from, where he has been, what he has
done, whom he has seen.

She examines his face, his clothes, his pockets. She sniffs his breath,
his hair, his hands.

She interprets his looks, his words, his gestures. She suspects his
thoughts, his intentions, his secrets.

This custom-house is a torture for the husband. It is an insult to his
dignity, a violation of his liberty, a menace to his peace.

It creates distrust, irritation, resentment. It provokes dissimulation,
falsehood, hypocrisy.

It leads to quarrels, disputes, reproaches. It causes coldness,
indifference, alienation.

It destroys confidence, sincerity, loyalty. It undermines love,
happiness, harmony.

Why does the wife establish this custom-house? Why does she subject her
husband to this torture?

It is because she is jealous. It is because she is suspicious. It is
because she is curious.

It is because she loves her husband, and fears to lose him. It is because
she distrusts her husband, and fears to be deceived by him. It is
because she is interested in her husband, and wants to know everything
about him.

Jealousy, suspicion, curiosity are natural sentiments in a woman who
loves. They are the consequences of love, the proofs of love, the
excesses of love.

But these sentiments, when they are excessive, become faults, vices,
passions.

They torment the woman who feels them, and the man who is the object of
them.

They poison love, destroy happiness, disturb peace.

How can the wife moderate these sentiments? How can she avoid these
excesses? How can she abolish this custom-house?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the wife how to control her jealousy, her
suspicion, her curiosity.

This science teaches her how to respect the dignity, the liberty, the
peace of her husband.

This science teaches her how to maintain confidence, sincerity, loyalty.

This science teaches her how to preserve love, happiness, harmony.

This science also teaches the husband how to pass through the
custom-house without torture, without insult, without menace.

This science teaches him how to avoid distrust, irritation, resentment.
It teaches him how to prevent dissimulation, falsehood, hypocrisy.

This science teaches him how to calm the jealousy, the suspicion, the
curiosity of his wife.

This science teaches him how to strengthen her confidence, her sincerity,
her loyalty.

This science teaches him how to increase her love, her happiness, her
harmony.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION VII

OF THE PREDETERMINED HUSBAND


There are men who seem to be born for marriage, as others are born for
celibacy.

These are the predetermined husbands.

They have the qualities, the virtues, the talents which make marriage
happy.

They are gentle, patient, indulgent. They are faithful, constant,
devoted.

They are amiable, attentive, obliging. They are polite, respectful,
considerate.

They are confident, sincere, loyal. They are modest, reserved, decent.

They love their wives, their children, their homes. They find their
happiness in marriage, in family, in domestic life.

These men are rare. They are exceptions. They are phenomena.

Most men are not predetermined husbands. They have faults, weaknesses,
imperfections which make marriage unhappy.

They are harsh, impatient, intolerant. They are unfaithful, inconstant,
selfish.

They are disagreeable, negligent, disobliging. They are rude,
disrespectful, inconsiderate.

They lack confidence, sincerity, loyalty. They lose modesty, reserve,
decency.

They do not love their wives, their children, their homes. They seek
their happiness outside of marriage, outside of family, outside of
domestic life.

These men are common. They are the rule. They are the majority.

Can these men become predetermined husbands? Can they acquire the
qualities, the virtues, the talents which make marriage happy?

Can they correct their faults, overcome their weaknesses, remedy their
imperfections?

Can they become gentle, patient, indulgent? Can they become faithful,
constant, devoted?

Can they become amiable, attentive, obliging? Can they become polite,
respectful, considerate?

Can they become confident, sincere, loyal? Can they become modest,
reserved, decent?

Can they learn to love their wives, their children, their homes? Can they
learn to find their happiness in marriage, in family, in domestic life?

Yes, it is possible. It is difficult, but it is possible.

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches men how to become predetermined husbands. It teaches
them how to acquire the qualities, the virtues, the talents which make
marriage happy.

This science teaches them how to correct their faults, overcome their
weaknesses, remedy their imperfections.

This science teaches them how to cultivate gentleness, patience,
indulgence. It teaches them how to practice fidelity, constancy,
devotion.

This science teaches them how to show amiability, attention, obligation.
It teaches them how to observe politeness, respect, consideration.

This science teaches them how to maintain confidence, sincerity, loyalty.
It teaches them how to preserve modesty, reserve, decency.

This science teaches them how to love their wives, their children, their
homes. It teaches them how to find their happiness in marriage, in
family, in domestic life.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION VIII

OF THE BOARDING-SCHOOL


Woman is educated in a boarding-school. She learns there everything
except what she ought to know.

She learns history, geography, grammar, arithmetic, music, drawing,
dancing.

She learns languages, literature, sciences, arts.

She learns accomplishments, manners, graces.

But she does not learn the duties, the virtues, the secrets of marriage.

She does not learn how to be a wife, a mother, a mistress of a house.

She does not learn how to love her husband, how to bring up her
children, how to manage her household.

She does not learn how to maintain her charm, her attraction, her
desire.

She does not learn how to cultivate her amiability, her attention, her
devotion.

She does not learn how to preserve her fidelity, her constancy, her
devotion.

She leaves the boarding-school ignorant, inexperienced, unprepared for
marriage.

She enters marriage as one enters an unknown country, without guide,
without map, without compass.

She commits faults, errors, blunders. She suffers disappointments,
disillusions, regrets.

She causes unhappiness to herself and to her husband.

This education is absurd, dangerous, fatal.

It is one of the principal causes of conjugal unhappiness.

How can this education be reformed? How can woman be prepared for
marriage? How can she be taught the duties, the virtues, the secrets of
marriage?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science ought to be taught to women before marriage. It ought to be
the complement, the crown, the essence of their education.

This science teaches women how to be wives, mothers, mistresses of
houses.

This science teaches them how to love their husbands, how to bring up
their children, how to manage their households.

This science teaches them how to maintain their charm, their attraction,
their desire.

This science teaches them how to cultivate their amiability, their
attention, their devotion.

This science teaches them how to preserve their fidelity, their
constancy, their devotion.

This science prepares women for marriage. It guides them, enlightens
them, protects them.

It prevents faults, errors, blunders. It avoids disappointments,
disillusions, regrets.

It assures happiness to themselves and to their husbands.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION IX

OF THE EPITHALAMIUM


When a young couple gets married, society surrounds them with
congratulations, festivities, rejoicings.

Poets compose epithalamiums for them. Musicians compose serenades for
them. Friends offer toasts to them.

Everybody wishes them happiness, prosperity, long life.

Everybody predicts for them a cloudless future, an eternal honeymoon, a
paradise on earth.

These congratulations, these festivities, these rejoicings are often
insincere, hypocritical, deceptive.

These epithalamiums, these serenades, these toasts are often empty,
conventional, meaningless.

These wishes, these predictions are often false, illusory, misleading.

Society knows well that marriage is not always happiness, prosperity,
long life.

Society knows well that the future is not always cloudless, the
honeymoon is not always eternal, the paradise is not always on earth.

Society knows well that marriage has its burdens, its duties, its taxes.
It has its pains, its sorrows, its tears.

Society knows well that marriage has its dangers, its pitfalls, its
shipwrecks. It has its infidelities, its adulteries, its separations.

Why then does society deceive the young couple? Why does it hide the
truth from them? Why does it lull them with illusions?

It is because society wants to encourage marriage. It is because society
needs marriage. It is because society depends on marriage.

Society sacrifices the happiness of individuals to its own stability,
its own preservation, its own interest.

Society acts like those merchants who praise their goods to sell them,
like those doctors who promise cures to attract patients, like those
lawyers who guarantee success to gain clients.

Society is a charlatan.

But cannot society be sincere? Cannot it tell the truth to the young
couple? Cannot it warn them of the dangers, prepare them for the
difficulties, arm them against the temptations?

Cannot society replace the insincere congratulations, the hypocritical
festivities, the deceptive rejoicings with wise counsels, useful
instructions, salutary examples?

Cannot society replace the empty epithalamiums, the conventional
serenades, the meaningless toasts with serious reflections, practical
lessons, profound truths?

Cannot society replace the false wishes, the illusory predictions, the
misleading prophecies with sincere prayers, prudent reserves, modest
hopes?

Yes, it is possible. It is desirable. It is necessary.

It requires courage, frankness, honesty. It requires wisdom, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science ought to inspire the language, the attitude, the conduct of
society towards the newly married.

This science teaches society how to be sincere, truthful, instructive
towards them.

This science teaches society how to warn them of dangers, prepare them
for difficulties, arm them against temptations.

This science teaches society how to give them wise counsels, useful
instructions, salutary examples.

This science teaches society how to offer them serious reflections,
practical lessons, profound truths.

This science teaches society how to address them with sincere prayers,
prudent reserves, modest hopes.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION X

FIRST MEDITATION


Let us suppose that you are married. You love your wife, and you think
that she loves you.

You are happy, or you think you are.

One evening, you return home later than usual. You find your wife alone,
pensive, melancholy.

She receives you with a forced smile, a languid air, a distracted mind.

She answers your questions vaguely, avoids your looks, repels your
caresses.

You attribute her mood to fatigue, headache, indisposition.

You try to console her, to amuse her, to distract her.

She remains cold, silent, indifferent.

You become impatient, irritated, angry.

You reproach her, accuse her, suspect her.

She bursts into tears, complains of your injustice, protests her
innocence.

You are moved, softened, repentant.

You ask her pardon, embrace her, adore her.

She forgives you, smiles at you, returns your caresses.

You are reconciled, happy, triumphant.

But the next day, the same scene is repeated, with variations.

And the day after, and the following days.

Your wife is always pensive, melancholy, distracted.

She is always cold, silent, indifferent.

She always weeps, complains, protests.

You begin to doubt her love, her fidelity, her virtue.

You begin to observe her, watch her, spy upon her.

You discover equivocal signs, suspicious circumstances, compromising
facts.

You find letters, portraits, presents.

You surprise interviews, appointments, rendezvous.

You obtain proofs, confessions, evidences.

Your wife has deceived you. She has a lover.

What will you do?

Will you kill her? Will you kill him? Will you kill yourself?

Will you challenge him? Will you prosecute her? Will you divorce her?

Will you forgive her? Will you take her back? Will you live with her?

Will you separate from her? Will you abandon her? Will you forget her?

These are the questions which arise in the mind of a husband who
discovers the infidelity of his wife.

These are the problems which the science of marriage must solve.

This science teaches the husband how to act in this terrible situation.

This science teaches him how to avoid violence, scandal, ridicule.

This science teaches him how to preserve his honor, his dignity, his
peace.

This science teaches him how to save his wife, his family, his future.

This science teaches him how to transform a misfortune into an advantage,
a defeat into a victory, a poison into a remedy.

This science is the subject of this book.




PART SECOND

THE MEANS OF DEFENCE, INTERIOR AND EXTERIOR


MEDITATION XI

OF MARITAL POLICY


Politics is the art of governing men. Marital policy is the art of
governing a woman.

The principles are the same. The application is different.

To govern men, it is necessary to know them. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to love her.

To govern men, it is necessary to be strong. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to be skillful.

To govern men, it is necessary to appeal to their reason. To govern a
woman, it is necessary to appeal to her heart.

To govern men, it is necessary to use force. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to use persuasion.

To govern men, it is necessary to divide them. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to unite her to oneself.

To govern men, it is necessary to deceive them. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to be sincere with her.

To govern men, it is necessary to flatter their vices. To govern a woman,
it is necessary to cultivate her virtues.

To govern men, it is necessary to inspire fear. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to inspire love.

To govern men, it is necessary to be a master. To govern a woman, it is
necessary to be a lover.

Marital policy consists in applying these principles to the government
of a wife.

It consists in knowing her character, her tastes, her habits. It
consists in studying her heart, her mind, her soul.

It consists in gaining her confidence, her esteem, her affection. It
consists in deserving her love, her fidelity, her devotion.

It consists in making her happy, or in making her believe that she is
happy.

It consists in preventing her from having desires, or in satisfying her
desires.

It consists in preventing her from committing faults, or in forgiving
her faults.

It consists in preventing her from deceiving her husband, or in
preventing her husband from knowing that she deceives him.

Marital policy is a difficult art. It requires intelligence, tact,
prudence. It requires patience, perseverance, self-control.

Marital policy is a necessary art. It is the condition of conjugal
happiness, peace, harmony.

Marital policy is the principal means of defence against the dangers,
the pitfalls, the shipwrecks of marriage.

Marital policy is the subject of this part of the book.


MEDITATION XII

OF THE MARRIED MAN’S HOME


An Englishman’s house is his castle. A married man’s home ought to be
his paradise.

It ought to be the place where he finds rest, peace, happiness. It ought
to be the sanctuary where he takes refuge from the cares, the troubles,
the storms of the world.

It ought to be the center of his affections, the object of his desires,
the goal of his ambitions.

To make his home a paradise, the married man must choose his wife well,
educate his children well, manage his household well.

He must make his home comfortable, agreeable, attractive. He must adorn
it with taste, elegance, luxury.

He must make his home animated, cheerful, lively. He must fill it with
music, flowers, friends.

He must make his home respectable, honorable, virtuous. He must banish
from it vice, disorder, scandal.

But above all, to make his home a paradise, the married man must reign
there as a master, a king, a god.

He must be respected, obeyed, adored by his wife, his children, his
servants.

He must inspire confidence, affection, devotion in his family.

He must be the soul, the light, the life of his home.

How can the married man attain this sovereignty? How can he establish
this empire? How can he preserve this prestige?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the married man how to make his home a paradise.

This science teaches him how to choose his wife, educate his children,
manage his household.

This science teaches him how to make his home comfortable, agreeable,
attractive. It teaches him how to adorn it with taste, elegance,
luxury.

This science teaches him how to make his home animated, cheerful, lively.
It teaches him how to fill it with music, flowers, friends.

This science teaches him how to make his home respectable, honorable,
virtuous. It teaches him how to banish from it vice, disorder, scandal.

This science teaches him how to reign there as a master, a king, a god.

This science teaches him how to be respected, obeyed, adored by his
family.

This science teaches him how to inspire confidence, affection, devotion
in them.

This science teaches him how to be the soul, the light, the life of his
home.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XIII

OF WOMAN’S PREDOMINANCE


Woman is physically weaker than man. But she is morally stronger.

She has more sensibility, more imagination, more finesse. She has more
patience, more perseverance, more devotion.

She has more art, more tact, more diplomacy. She has more grace, more
charm, more seduction.

She governs man by her weakness, by her tears, by her caresses.

She governs him by her beauty, by her elegance, by her coquetry.

She governs him by her intelligence, by her wit, by her conversation.

She governs him by her virtue, by her piety, by her example.

She governs him by her faults, by her caprices, by her passions.

Woman’s predominance is a fact. It is a law of nature, a necessity of
society, a condition of civilization.

This predominance is exercised especially in marriage. The wife governs
the husband, consciously or unconsciously, directly or indirectly,
openly or secretly.

She governs him for his good or for his evil, for his happiness or for
his unhappiness.

She makes him what she pleases: a hero or a coward, a genius or an
idiot, a saint or a criminal.

The husband who knows how to recognize, accept, utilize this
predominance is a wise man. He is a philosopher. He is a knowing one.

He does not struggle against the influence of his wife. He directs it,
moderates it, regulates it.

He makes it an instrument of his happiness, a means of his perfection, a
guarantee of his peace.

He associates his wife with his life, his thoughts, his projects. He
consults her, listens to her, follows her advice.

He makes her his companion, his friend, his confidante. He makes her his
equal, his partner, his ally.

He respects her personality, her independence, her liberty. He develops
her intelligence, her reason, her judgment.

He cultivates her virtues, corrects her faults, pardons her weaknesses.

He loves her, esteems her, honors her.

The husband who resists, combats, denies this predominance is a fool. He
is an ignoramus. He is a brute.

He struggles against the influence of his wife. He irritates it,
exasperates it, perverts it.

He makes it an instrument of his unhappiness, a cause of his degradation,
a source of his troubles.

He excludes his wife from his life, his thoughts, his projects. He
despises her, contradicts her, rejects her advice.

He makes her his servant, his slave, his victim. He makes her his
inferior, his subordinate, his enemy.

He violates her personality, her independence, her liberty. He stifles
her intelligence, her reason, her judgment.

He encourages her faults, ignores her virtues, punishes her weaknesses.

He hates her, scorns her, dishonors her.

How can the husband recognize, accept, utilize the predominance of his
wife?

How can he direct it, moderate it, regulate it?

How can he make it an instrument of his happiness, a means of his
perfection, a guarantee of his peace?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband the secrets of woman’s heart, the
mysteries of her nature, the laws of her influence.

This science teaches him how to associate his wife with his life, his
thoughts, his projects. It teaches him how to consult her, listen to
her, follow her advice.

This science teaches him how to make her his companion, his friend, his
confidante. It teaches him how to make her his equal, his partner, his
ally.

This science teaches him how to respect her personality, her
independence, her liberty. It teaches him how to develop her
intelligence, her reason, her judgment.

This science teaches him how to cultivate her virtues, correct her
faults, pardon her weaknesses.

This science teaches him how to love her, esteem her, honor her.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XIV

CONCERNING THE EDUCATION OF WOMEN


Napoleon said: “The education of women ought to commence with religion.”

This maxim is profound. It is true. It is useful.

Religion teaches woman her duties towards God, towards herself, towards
others.

Religion teaches her the virtues which make her amiable, respectable,
happy: piety, modesty, gentleness, patience, charity.

Religion teaches her the principles which guide her conduct, regulate
her passions, assure her salvation: faith, hope, love.

Religion gives woman a support in trials, a consolation in sorrows, a
hope in death.

Religion makes woman superior to man in the moral order, as man is
superior to woman in the physical order.

But religion is not sufficient for the education of women. It must be
completed by instruction, by reason, by philosophy.

Instruction develops the intelligence of woman. It furnishes her mind
with knowledge, ideas, resources.

Instruction makes woman capable of understanding her husband, of sharing
his thoughts, of associating herself with his life.

Instruction makes woman capable of educating her children, of forming
their minds, of directing their hearts.

Instruction makes woman capable of managing her household, of regulating
her expenses, of maintaining order and economy.

Reason develops the judgment of woman. It teaches her to distinguish
the true from the false, the good from the evil, the useful from the
harmful.

Reason makes woman capable of guiding her conduct, of controlling her
passions, of resisting temptations.

Reason makes woman capable of appreciating her husband, of respecting
his rights, of fulfilling her duties.

Reason makes woman capable of bringing up her children wisely, of
correcting their faults, of developing their virtues.

Reason makes woman capable of governing her household prudently, of
avoiding waste, of assuring prosperity.

Philosophy develops the soul of woman. It elevates her thoughts, ennobles
her sentiments, purifies her desires.

Philosophy makes woman capable of understanding the mysteries of life,
the secrets of happiness, the laws of destiny.

Philosophy makes woman capable of supporting trials with courage, of
facing sorrows with resignation, of meeting death with serenity.

Philosophy makes woman capable of loving her husband with devotion, of
serving him with zeal, of sacrificing herself for him with joy.

Philosophy makes woman capable of educating her children with love, of
guiding them with wisdom, of inspiring them with virtue.

Philosophy makes woman capable of managing her household with dignity, of
adorning it with grace, of sanctifying it with piety.

Religion, instruction, reason, philosophy: these are the four elements
of the complete education of women.

This education makes woman the companion, the friend, the equal of man.

This education makes woman the soul, the light, the life of the family.

This education makes woman the ornament, the charm, the glory of
society.

This education assures the happiness of woman, the happiness of man, the
happiness of humanity.

How can this education be given to women? How can it be organized? How
can it be generalized?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science determines the principles, the methods, the means of the
complete education of women.

This science teaches how to combine religion, instruction, reason,
philosophy in this education.

This science teaches how to adapt this education to the character, the
tastes, the destiny of each woman.

This science teaches how to make this education practical, useful,
effective.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XV

OF THE CAT AND THE FOX


A fable.

The Cat and the Fox were traveling together. They were discussing the
dangers of the road, the cruelty of the dogs, the malice of the hunters.

“For my part,” said the Fox, “I have a thousand tricks to escape them.
I know how to double, how to turn, how to hide. I know how to simulate
death, how to climb trees, how to swim rivers. I have a bag full of
stratagems.”

“As for me,” said the Cat modestly, “I have only one trick, but it is a
good one.”

At that moment, they heard the barking of dogs, the sound of horns, the
shouts of hunters.

“Quick,” said the Cat, “here they come. Use your best trick.”

And the Cat climbed nimbly up a tree, and hid among the leaves.

The Fox tried his thousand tricks. He doubled, he turned, he hid. He
simulated death, he tried to climb trees, he plunged into the river.

But the dogs were faster, the hunters were more skillful. They caught
the Fox, and killed him.

Moral:

One good trick is worth more than a thousand bad ones.

Application:

Woman has a thousand tricks to deceive her husband. She knows how to
feign love, tenderness, submission. She knows how to simulate virtue,
piety, modesty.

She knows how to use tears, smiles, caresses. She knows how to employ
flattery, artifice, seduction.

She has a bag full of stratagems.

The husband has only one trick to defend himself. But it is a good one.

It is to know his wife well. It is to study her character, her tastes,
her habits. It is to penetrate her heart, her mind, her soul.

It is to anticipate her desires, her caprices, her passions. It is to
foresee her actions, her intentions, her secrets.

It is to be always vigilant, always attentive, always master of himself
and of her.

This trick is worth more than all the tricks of woman.

This trick is the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband how to know his wife well.

This science teaches him how to study her character, her tastes, her
habits.

This science teaches him how to penetrate her heart, her mind, her soul.

This science teaches him how to anticipate her desires, her caprices, her
passions.

This science teaches him how to foresee her actions, her intentions, her
secrets.

This science teaches him how to be always vigilant, always attentive,
always master of himself and of her.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XVI

OF DIVERSIONS


Man needs diversions. Woman needs them still more.

Diversions distract the mind, relax the body, refresh the soul.

Diversions dissipate boredom, prevent melancholy, combat sadness.

Diversions procure pleasures, create illusions, stimulate desires.

Marriage is often monotonous, uniform, dull. It needs diversions to
break its monotony, vary its uniformity, brighten its dullness.

The husband and wife ought to seek diversions together. They ought to
share the same pleasures, the same tastes, the same amusements.

They ought to go together to the theatre, to concerts, to balls. They
ought to travel together, visit friends together, receive company
together.

They ought to cultivate together arts, sciences, letters. They ought to
read together, study together, converse together.

They ought to practice together exercises, games, sports. They ought to
walk together, ride together, hunt together.

These common diversions strengthen the bond of marriage. They nourish
love, maintain harmony, assure happiness.

But often the husband and wife seek diversions separately. They have
different pleasures, different tastes, different amusements.

The husband goes to his club, to his cafe, to his mistress. The wife
goes to her church, to her charities, to her lover.

The husband cultivates politics, business, ambition. The wife cultivates
fashion, luxury, coquetry.

The husband practices hunting, gambling, drinking. The wife practices
dancing, flirting, intriguing.

These separate diversions weaken the bond of marriage. They chill love,
disturb harmony, destroy happiness.

They create misunderstandings, disagreements, quarrels. They lead to
infidelities, adulteries, separations.

How can the husband and wife seek diversions together? How can they share
the same pleasures, the same tastes, the same amusements?

How can they avoid separate diversions, different pleasures, different
tastes, different amusements?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife how to choose, organize,
regulate their diversions.

This science teaches them how to make their diversions common, useful,
agreeable.

This science teaches them how to find in their diversions a source of
union, of pleasure, of perfection.

This science teaches them how to avoid the dangers, the excesses, the
corruptions of diversions.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XVII

OF JEALOUSY


Jealousy is a monster which is born of love, lives on suspicion, and
dies with certainty.

Jealousy is a passion which torments the heart, troubles the mind,
degrades the soul.

Jealousy is a poison which infects love, destroys happiness, disturbs
peace.

Jealousy is a tyrant which enslaves the will, blinds the reason,
perverts the judgment.

Jealousy is a madness which leads to violence, crime, despair.

Jealousy is common in marriage. It is often caused by the conduct of the
husband or wife. It is often provoked by the malice of others.

It is often nourished by appearances, coincidences, trifles.

It is often cured by time, by reflection, by evidence.

It is often fatal to love, to happiness, to life.

How can jealousy be prevented? How can it be cured? How can its fatal
effects be avoided?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife how to avoid the causes,
the occasions, the pretexts of jealousy.

This science teaches them how to dissipate suspicions, clarify doubts,
destroy appearances.

This science teaches them how to control their imagination, moderate
their sensibility, regulate their heart.

This science teaches them how to maintain confidence, sincerity, loyalty
towards each other.

This science teaches them how to preserve love, happiness, peace in
spite of jealousy.

This science teaches them how to transform jealousy from a poison into a
remedy, from a madness into a wisdom, from a tyrant into a servant.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XVIII

OF TEMPER


Temper is the disposition of the soul, the state of the mind, the mood
of the heart.

Temper varies according to constitution, health, circumstances.

Temper is good or bad, equal or unequal, gentle or violent.

Good temper is a treasure. It makes life sweet, agreeable, happy.

Bad temper is a scourge. It makes life bitter, disagreeable, unhappy.

Temper is very important in marriage. It influences the relations, the
feelings, the conduct of the husband and wife.

Good temper maintains love, harmony, peace. Bad temper chills love,
disturbs harmony, destroys peace.

The husband and wife ought to cultivate good temper in themselves and in
each other.

They ought to avoid bad temper, combat it, correct it.

They ought to be gentle, patient, indulgent towards each other.

They ought to support each other’s faults, weaknesses, imperfections.

They ought to forgive each other’s offenses, forget each other’s wrongs,
reconcile after each other’s quarrels.

But often the husband and wife neglect their temper. They let it become
bad, unequal, violent.

They become irritable, impatient, intolerant towards each other.

They exaggerate each other’s faults, weaknesses, imperfections.

They remember each other’s offenses, harbor each other’s wrongs, prolong
each other’s quarrels.

This neglect of temper is one of the principal causes of conjugal
unhappiness.

How can good temper be cultivated? How can bad temper be corrected? How
can the fatal effects of bad temper be avoided?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
philosophy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the secrets of temper, the laws
of its variations, the means of its control.

This science teaches them how to cultivate gentleness, patience,
indulgence.

This science teaches them how to support faults, weaknesses,
imperfections.

This science teaches them how to forgive offenses, forget wrongs,
reconcile after quarrels.

This science teaches them how to make good temper a source of love,
harmony, peace.

This science teaches them how to transform bad temper from a scourge into
a discipline, from a poison into a remedy, from a fault into a virtue.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XIX

OF MIGRAINE


Migraine is a headache which affects one side of the head. It is often
accompanied by nausea, vomiting, visual disturbances.

Migraine is a common affection, especially among women. It is often
caused by fatigue, emotion, indigestion.

Migraine is a painful, debilitating, inconvenient affection. It renders
the person incapable of work, of pleasure, of society.

Migraine is often used by women as a pretext, an excuse, a weapon.

They use it to avoid duties, to refuse pleasures, to obtain concessions.

They use it to attract attention, to excite pity, to exercise tyranny.

They use it to punish their husbands, to torment their lovers, to deceive
their doctors.

The husband ought to know how to distinguish real migraine from feigned
migraine.

He ought to know how to treat real migraine with compassion, care,
remedies.

He ought to know how to treat feigned migraine with indifference,
firmness, skill.

He ought not to let himself be duped, dominated, tormented by his wife’s
migraine.

How can the husband acquire this knowledge, this skill, this firmness?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires observation,
experience, psychology.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband the symptoms, the causes, the treatment
of migraine.

This science teaches him how to recognize real migraine and feigned
migraine.

This science teaches him how to act towards his wife according to the
nature of her migraine.

This science teaches him how to cure real migraine, or at least to
alleviate it.

This science teaches him how to unmask feigned migraine, or at least to
neutralize it.

This science teaches him how to prevent migraine from becoming a source
of discord, of unhappiness, of ridicule.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XX

OF PERSONAL CLEANLINESS


Cleanliness is next to godliness. It is also next to loveliness.

Cleanliness is the first condition of health, of comfort, of elegance.

Cleanliness is the mark of self-respect, of respect for others, of
civilization.

Personal cleanliness is especially necessary in marriage. It is one of
the foundations of love, of attraction, of desire.

The husband and wife ought to pay great attention to their personal
cleanliness.

They ought to keep their bodies, their clothes, their linen perfectly
clean.

They ought to use water, soap, perfumes abundantly.

They ought to avoid everything which can offend the senses of the other:
bad breath, perspiration, dirtiness.

They ought to preserve the freshness, the neatness, the grace of their
person.

But often the husband and wife neglect their personal cleanliness after
marriage.

They become careless, slovenly, dirty.

They lose the habit of washing, bathing, perfuming themselves.

They acquire bad breath, perspiration, dirtiness.

They lose the freshness, the neatness, the grace of their person.

This neglect of personal cleanliness is one of the principal causes of
conjugal disgust, coldness, alienation.

It destroys love, attraction, desire.

It creates repulsion, aversion, contempt.

It leads to separate rooms, separate beds, separate lives.

How can personal cleanliness be maintained after marriage? How can its
neglect be avoided? How can its fatal effects be prevented?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires will, reason,
hygiene.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the rules, the principles, the
secrets of personal cleanliness.

This science teaches them how to keep their bodies, their clothes, their
linen perfectly clean.

This science teaches them how to use water, soap, perfumes wisely.

This science teaches them how to avoid everything which can offend the
senses of the other.

This science teaches them how to preserve the freshness, the neatness,
the grace of their person.

This science teaches them how to make personal cleanliness a source of
love, of attraction, of desire.

This science teaches them how to prevent personal cleanliness from
becoming a cause of disgust, of coldness, of alienation.

This science is the subject of this book.




PART THIRD

CIVIL WAR


MEDITATION XXI

OF STRATAGEMS


Marriage is often a state of war. It is a civil war, interior, secret,
permanent.

It is a war between two opposing powers, two rival interests, two
contrary wills.

It is a war of stratagems, of ruses, of maneuvers. It is a war of
attacks, of defences, of reprisals.

It is a war where victory is uncertain, peace is precarious, truce is
deceptive.

The husband and wife are the two belligerents. They employ all the
resources of their intelligence, their character, their position.

They use cunning, dissimulation, hypocrisy. They use flattery,
persuasion, seduction.

They use threats, violence, tyranny. They use tears, complaints,
reproaches.

They use jealousy, suspicion, espionage. They use coquetry, infidelity,
adultery.

They seek allies, accomplices, confidants. They form parties, factions,
intrigues.

They fight for power, for liberty, for pleasure. They fight for money,
for children, for reputation.

This war is deplorable. It destroys love, happiness, peace. It degrades
the character, corrupts the heart, perverts the mind.

It causes scandals, lawsuits, divorces. It ruins families, dishonors
names, compromises futures.

How can this war be avoided? How can it be terminated? How can its fatal
effects be prevented?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires wisdom, justice,
moderation.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the causes, the nature, the
consequences of marital war.

This science teaches them how to prevent conflicts, how to resolve
disputes, how to establish peace.

This science teaches them how to replace stratagems with sincerity,
ruses with loyalty, maneuvers with frankness.

This science teaches them how to replace attacks with concessions,
defences with indulgence, reprisals with forgiveness.

This science teaches them how to replace war with love, hostility with
harmony, discord with concord.

This science teaches them how to make marriage a state of peace, of
union, of happiness.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXII

PRINCIPLES OF WAR


In war, as in marriage, there are principles, rules, maxims which ensure
success.

These principles are founded on the knowledge of the human heart, on the
experience of ages, on the analysis of facts.

These principles constitute the science of war, the science of marriage.

Here are some of these principles, applied to marital war:

1. Know your enemy. Study the character, the tastes, the habits, the
passions, the weaknesses of your wife (or husband).

2. Know yourself. Study your own character, your tastes, your habits,
your passions, your weaknesses.

3. Choose your battlefield. Choose the time, the place, the
circumstances favorable to your attack or defence.

4. Concentrate your forces. Attack one point at a time, the weakest
point, the essential point.

5. Surprise your enemy. Act unexpectedly, rapidly, decisively.

6. Deceive your enemy. Use ruses, feints, ambushes. Hide your plans,
your forces, your movements.

7. Divide your enemy. Sow discord, jealousy, suspicion between your wife
(or husband) and her (or his) allies, accomplices, confidants.

8. Corrupt your enemy. Use flattery, presents, promises. Appeal to her
(or his) vanity, cupidity, ambition.

9. Intimidate your enemy. Use threats, anger, violence. Show your
strength, your resolution, your power.

10. Pursue your enemy. Do not give her (or him) time to recover, to
rally, to resist. Exploit your victory to the utmost.

11. Negotiate with your enemy. Know when to offer peace, to grant a
truce, to make concessions. Know how to obtain the best possible terms.

12. Respect your enemy. Do not push her (or him) to despair. Do not
humiliate her (or him) unnecessarily. Do not forget that she (or he) may
become your friend, your ally, your companion again.

These principles are general. Their application depends on the
circumstances, the characters, the objects of the war.

The science of marriage teaches how to apply these principles wisely,
skillfully, effectively.

This science teaches how to wage war when it is necessary, how to avoid
it when it is possible, how to end it when it is desirable.

This science teaches how to make war itself a means of peace, of union,
of happiness.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXIII

OF ALLIES


In marital war, as in political war, allies are useful, necessary,
dangerous.

They increase your forces, support your cause, share your dangers.

But they also have their own interests, their own passions, their own
plans.

They may betray you, abandon you, sacrifice you.

The allies of the husband are usually men: his friends, his relatives,
his colleagues.

The allies of the wife are usually women: her friends, her relatives,
her confidantes.

The husband ought to choose his allies carefully. He ought to prefer
those who are discreet, loyal, disinterested.

He ought to use them prudently. He ought not to reveal his secrets to
them, entrust his honor to them, depend entirely on them.

He ought to know how to reward them, how to control them, how to dismiss
them.

The wife ought to choose her allies carefully. She ought to prefer those
who are virtuous, sensible, devoted.

She ought to use them prudently. She ought not to follow their advice
blindly, imitate their example rashly, compromise herself for them
lightly.

She ought to know how to resist their influence, escape their domination,
preserve her independence.

The most dangerous allies are the confidants and confidantes.

They penetrate into the secrets of the household, the intimacy of the
couple, the mysteries of the heart.

They witness the quarrels, the weaknesses, the faults. They hear the
complaints, the confessions, the accusations.

They flatter, console, advise. They approve, blame, judge.

They excite passions, nourish resentments, foment discords.

They often become the lovers of the wife, or the mistresses of the
husband.

They betray the secrets, reveal the faults, publish the scandals.

They ruin the reputation, destroy the peace, break the marriage.

The husband and wife ought to avoid confidants and confidantes.

They ought to be sufficient for each other. They ought to be each
other’s best friend, best ally, best confidant.

How can the husband and wife choose, use, control their allies?

How can they avoid the dangers of allies, especially confidants and
confidantes?

How can they become sufficient for each other?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires wisdom, prudence,
discretion.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the role, the utility, the
dangers of allies in marital war.

This science teaches them how to choose their allies among their friends,
their relatives, their acquaintances.

This science teaches them how to use their allies for their defence, for
their reconciliation, for their happiness.

This science teaches them how to avoid the traps, the perfidies, the
betrayals of allies.

This science teaches them how to guard themselves against confidants and
confidantes, or how to make them harmless.

This science teaches them how to find in themselves, in their union, in
their love, the best support, the best counsel, the best consolation.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXIV

OF SECRET AGENTS


In marital war, as in political war, secret agents are sometimes
employed.

These are spies, informers, traitors who penetrate the enemy’s camp,
discover his plans, reveal his secrets.

The husband sometimes employs secret agents to watch his wife, to follow
her movements, to surprise her infidelities.

He employs servants, neighbors, friends. He employs detectives,
policemen, lawyers.

The wife sometimes employs secret agents to watch her husband, to know
his habits, to discover his mistresses.

She employs maids, hairdressers, milliners. She employs fortune-tellers,
somnambulists, magnetizers.

The use of secret agents is base, degrading, dangerous.

It dishonors the one who employs them, corrupts the one who serves as
one, compromises the one who is the object of them.

It destroys confidence, esteem, affection. It creates suspicion,
hatred, contempt.

It leads to scandals, lawsuits, crimes.

The husband and wife ought to avoid the use of secret agents.

They ought to respect each other’s liberty, privacy, dignity.

They ought to rely on their own observation, their own judgment, their
own intuition.

They ought to prefer ignorance to certainty, doubt to proof, illusion to
truth, when truth is shameful, proof is odious, certainty is fatal.

But if the use of secret agents is sometimes necessary, how can it be
justified? How can it be regulated? How can its dangers be minimized?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires necessity, prudence,
skill.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the cases, the conditions, the
limits in which the use of secret agents may be tolerated.

This science teaches them how to choose their secret agents among people
who are honest, discreet, reliable.

This science teaches them how to direct their secret agents with wisdom,
moderation, justice.

This science teaches them how to use the information obtained from secret
agents with prudence, discernment, reserve.

This science teaches them how to avoid the traps, the errors, the abuses
of espionage.

This science teaches them how to prefer open observation to secret
espionage, direct confrontation to indirect information, mutual
confidence to perpetual suspicion.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXV

OF DIFFERENT KINDS OF ADULTERY


Adultery is the violation of the marriage vow. It is the infidelity of
the husband or wife.

Adultery is a crime according to religion, a fault according to morality,
a misfortune according to society.

Adultery has different degrees, different forms, different consequences.

There is adultery of the heart, adultery of the senses, adultery of the
mind.

Adultery of the heart is the preference given to another person over
one’s spouse. It is the alienation of affection, the transfer of love,
the division of sentiment.

Adultery of the senses is the physical union with another person. It is
the satisfaction of desire, the gratification of passion, the profanation
of the body.

Adultery of the mind is the intellectual sympathy with another person. It
is the communion of thoughts, the harmony of tastes, the affinity of
souls.

Adultery of the heart is the most common, the most secret, the most
lasting. It is often involuntary, unconscious, platonic.

Adultery of the senses is the most brutal, the most shameful, the most
dangerous. It is often accidental, momentary, venal.

Adultery of the mind is the most refined, the most subtle, the most
ideal. It is often elevated, pure, spiritual.

Adultery of the heart prepares adultery of the senses. Adultery of the
senses confirms adultery of the heart. Adultery of the mind justifies
both.

Adultery is committed by the husband or by the wife.

Adultery of the husband is more frequent, more tolerated, less serious in
its social consequences.

Adultery of the wife is less frequent, less tolerated, more serious in
its social consequences.

Adultery of the husband wounds the love, the pride, the jealousy of the
wife.

Adultery of the wife wounds the honor, the name, the interest of the
husband.

Adultery of the husband does not introduce spurious children into the
family.

Adultery of the wife may introduce spurious children into the family,
disrupt the succession, defraud the legitimate heirs.

Adultery has different causes, different motives, different excuses.

It is caused by love, by passion, by vanity. It is caused by boredom, by
curiosity, by revenge.

It is caused by temperament, by opportunity, by seduction.

It is motivated by pleasure, by interest, by ambition.

It is excused by youth, by beauty, by wit. It is excused by neglect, by
ill-treatment, by incompatibility.

Adultery has different consequences, different remedies, different
punishments.

It causes unhappiness, discord, separation. It causes scandals,
lawsuits, divorces.

It causes crimes, duels, murders.

It is remedied by forgiveness, by reconciliation, by reform.

It is punished by law, by opinion, by conscience.

How can adultery be prevented? How can it be detected? How can it be
treated?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires wisdom, justice,
mercy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband and wife the nature, the causes, the
effects of adultery.

This science teaches them how to avoid the temptations, the occasions,
the dangers of adultery.

This science teaches them how to recognize the signs, the symptoms, the
proofs of adultery.

This science teaches them how to act towards the guilty spouse according
to the circumstances, the motives, the consequences of adultery.

This science teaches them how to choose between rigor and indulgence,
between punishment and forgiveness, between separation and
reconciliation.

This science teaches them how to save their honor, their peace, their
future, even after adultery.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXVI

OF THE LOVER


The lover is the natural enemy of the husband. He is the rival, the
usurper, the destroyer.

He attacks the husband in his most precious possession: his wife.

He steals her heart, her body, her soul. He takes her love, her
pleasure, her happiness.

He dishonors her name, ruins her reputation, compromises her future.

He introduces disorder, discord, despair into the household.

He is the cause of tears, of quarrels, of crimes.

The lover is usually young, handsome, amiable. He is elegant, witty,
seductive.

He knows how to please women, how to flatter them, how to conquer them.

He uses all the resources of art, of nature, of fortune.

He uses poetry, music, flowers. He uses presents, promises, oaths.

He uses audacity, perseverance, passion.

The lover is often superior to the husband in physical or moral
qualities.

He is sometimes superior in birth, in rank, in wealth.

He is always superior in the art of love.

The lover has advantages over the husband. He has novelty, mystery,
romance.

He has liberty, leisure, opportunity.

He has the complicity of the wife, the indulgence of society, the favor
of circumstances.

The husband has disadvantages against the lover. He has habit, familiarity,
prosaism.

He has duties, occupations, constraints.

He has the indifference of the wife, the severity of opinion, the
hostility of circumstances.

How can the husband defend himself against the lover? How can he combat
him? How can he vanquish him?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires courage, skill,
resolution.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband how to know the lover, how to recognize
him, how to unmask him.

This science teaches him how to anticipate the attacks of the lover, how
to parry his blows, how to neutralize his maneuvers.

This science teaches him how to fight the lover on his own ground, with
his own weapons, by his own methods.

This science teaches him how to use novelty, mystery, romance against the
lover.

This science teaches him how to use liberty, leisure, opportunity against
the lover.

This science teaches him how to regain the complicity of the wife,
conciliate the indulgence of society, turn circumstances to his favor.

This science teaches him how to transform habit into affection,
familiarity into intimacy, prosaism into poetry.

This science teaches him how to make his duties pleasures, his
occupations distractions, his constraints liberties.

This science teaches him how to reconquer the love, the esteem, the
confidence of his wife.

This science teaches him how to become superior to the lover, not only as
a husband, but also as a man, and even as a lover.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXVII

OF ACCOMPLICES


The lover rarely acts alone. He usually has accomplices who help him,
support him, protect him.

These accomplices are men or women, relatives or friends, servants or
strangers.

They facilitate the meetings, transmit the letters, keep the secrets.

They deceive the husband, distract his attention, lull his suspicions.

They praise the lover, excuse the wife, blame the husband.

They encourage the passion, justify the fault, precipitate the ruin.

Accomplices are often motivated by friendship, by pity, by interest. They
are sometimes motivated by malice, by envy, by revenge.

They are always dangerous, perfidious, culpable.

They share the responsibility, the shame, the punishment of adultery.

The husband ought to know how to recognize the accomplices of the lover
and the wife.

He ought to know how to distinguish the involuntary accomplices from the
voluntary accomplices, the passive accomplices from the active
accomplices.

He ought to know how to neutralize the action of accomplices, how to
counteract their influence, how to punish their perfidy.

He ought to know how to detach the accomplices from the lover and the
wife, how to win them over to his side, how to make them serve his own
cause.

How can the husband acquire this knowledge, this skill, this power?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires observation,
psychology, diplomacy.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband the role, the motives, the maneuvers of
accomplices in adultery.

This science teaches him how to discover the accomplices among the
relatives, the friends, the servants, the strangers.

This science teaches him how to classify the accomplices according to
their degree of culpability, of danger, of utility.

This science teaches him how to act towards the accomplices according to
their character, their position, their interest.

This science teaches him how to intimidate the accomplices, how to bribe
them, how to compromise them.

This science teaches him how to separate the accomplices from the guilty
couple, how to sow discord among them, how to make them betray each
other.

This science teaches him how to transform the accomplices from enemies
into allies, from obstacles into instruments, from dangers into
safeguards.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXVIII

OF THE PHYSICIAN


The physician is often admitted into the intimacy of the household. He
knows the secrets of the bodies, and sometimes the secrets of the souls.

He witnesses the physical and moral sufferings of the husband and wife.
He hears their complaints, their confessions, their confidences.

He advises them, consoles them, treats them. He prescribes remedies,
regimens, precautions.

He exercises a great influence over their minds, their wills, their
lives.

The physician can be a valuable auxiliary for the husband in marital
war.

He can help him to know his wife better, to understand her temperament,
her constitution, her health.

He can help him to discover the causes of her moods, her caprices, her
maladies.

He can help him to distinguish real sufferings from feigned sufferings,
natural symptoms from artificial symptoms.

He can help him to treat his wife wisely, to manage her skillfully, to
govern her effectively.

He can help him to prevent or cure the physical or moral disorders which
may lead her to infidelity.

But the physician can also be a dangerous enemy for the husband.

He can abuse his influence over the wife, seduce her heart, corrupt her
mind.

He can become her confidant, her accomplice, her lover.

He can favor her intrigues, cover her faults, protect her vices.

He can deceive the husband, betray his confidence, ruin his happiness.

The husband ought to know how to choose his physician well. He ought to
prefer one who is skillful, honest, discreet.

He ought to know how to use his physician wisely. He ought to consult
him, listen to him, follow his advice, but without servility, without
blindness, without abdication.

He ought to know how to watch his physician prudently. He ought to
observe his conduct, penetrate his intentions, control his influence.

He ought to know how to make his physician his friend, his ally, his
support, and not his rival, his enemy, his master.

How can the husband acquire this discernment, this prudence, this skill?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires observation,
psychology, experience.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband the role, the power, the dangers of the
physician in marriage.

This science teaches him how to choose a physician who is worthy of his
confidence, his esteem, his gratitude.

This science teaches him how to establish relations with his physician
based on frankness, loyalty, mutual respect.

This science teaches him how to utilize the knowledge, the experience,
the authority of the physician for the good of his wife, his family, his
home.

This science teaches him how to guard himself against the possible
errors, abuses, perfidies of the physician.

This science teaches him how to preserve his independence, his dignity,
his sovereignty in his own house, even in the presence of the physician.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXIX

OF THE CONFESSOR


The confessor is another power which penetrates into the intimacy of the
household, especially in Catholic countries.

He is the spiritual director of the wife. He governs her conscience, her
soul, her life.

He knows her thoughts, her desires, her faults. He hears her confessions,
her regrets, her resolutions.

He advises her, exhorts her, absolves her. He prescribes prayers,
penances, practices.

He exercises an immense influence over her mind, her heart, her will.

The confessor can be a powerful auxiliary for the husband.

He can help him to maintain his wife in the path of duty, of virtue, of
piety.

He can help him to correct her faults, to moderate her passions, to
elevate her sentiments.

He can help him to strengthen her love, her fidelity, her devotion
towards her husband.

He can help him to preserve peace, harmony, happiness in the household.

But the confessor can also be a formidable enemy for the husband.

He can abuse his influence over the wife, trouble her conscience, mislead
her mind.

He can inspire her with aversion, contempt, hatred for her husband.

He can encourage her resistance, her disobedience, her revolt.

He can favor her separation, her divorce, her flight.

He can become her accomplice, her guide, her master in the ways of
hypocrisy, of fanaticism, of intrigue.

The husband ought to know how to act towards the confessor of his wife.

He ought to respect religion, the church, the priest. But he ought also
to defend his rights, his authority, his dignity as a husband.

He ought to know how to distinguish the legitimate influence of the
confessor from his abusive influence, his spiritual direction from his
temporal interference.

He ought to know how to gain the esteem, the confidence, the friendship
of the confessor.

He ought to know how to make the confessor his ally, his support, his
collaborator in the work of conjugal happiness.

He ought to know how to neutralize the hostile action of the confessor,
how to combat his excessive influence, how to denounce his possible
abuses.

How can the husband acquire this wisdom, this prudence, this firmness?

It requires art, science, calculation. It requires tact, diplomacy,
psychology.

It requires the science of marriage.

This science teaches the husband the role, the power, the dangers of the
confessor in marriage.

This science teaches him how to respect the religious convictions of his
wife, and the ministry of the priest, without sacrificing his marital
authority.

This science teaches him how to establish relations with the confessor
based on politeness, frankness, mutual consideration.

This science teaches him how to utilize the spiritual influence of the
confessor for the moral good of his wife, for the peace of his
household, for the salvation of his soul.

This science teaches him how to guard himself against the possible
errors, intrusions, usurpations of the confessor.

This science teaches him how to remain the sole master of his wife, his
family, his home, under the eye of God.

This science is the subject of this book.


MEDITATION XXX

CONCLUSION


We have reached the end of our meditations on the physiology of
marriage.

We have analyzed the causes, the symptoms, the consequences of conjugal
happiness and unhappiness.

We have indicated the means of defence, interior and exterior, which the
husband can employ against the dangers which menace his peace.

We have examined the principles, the rules, the stratagems of marital
war.

We have studied the role of allies, of secret agents, of the physician,
of the confessor in this war.

We have shown that marriage, such as civilization has made it, is a
difficult, perilous, complex state.

We have shown that conjugal happiness is not a gift of nature, a favor
of chance, a result of instinct.

We have shown that conjugal happiness is a work of art, a product of
science, a conquest of will.

We have shown that this art, this science, this will constitute the
science of marriage.

This science is not yet created. It is scattered in the observations of
moralists, in the experience of husbands, in the intuition of women.

This book is only a sketch, an essay, an introduction to this science.

It is addressed to the knowing ones, to the philosophers, to the artists
of marriage.

It is addressed to those who want to understand marriage, to master it,
to perfect it.

It is addressed to those who want to make marriage a source of happiness,
of virtue, of glory.

May this book enlighten them, guide them, help them!

May it contribute to diminish the number of unhappy homes, to increase
the number of happy marriages!

May it contribute to the progress of civilization, to the perfection of
humanity, to the glory of God!

This is the wish, the hope, the prayer of the author.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHYSIOLOGY OF MARRIAGE, COMPLETE ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license,
apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™ concept and trademark. Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark
license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this
eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. Project Gutenberg™ eBooks may be
modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING
in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.


*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™ electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States
and you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to
prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or
creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references
to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will
support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting free access to
electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™ works in
compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project
Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily comply with
the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the same format
with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you share it
without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
changing constantly. If you are outside the United States, check the
laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™
work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright
status of any work in any country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived
from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a
copyright notice), then you may copy and distribute it in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™ trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other
than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg website (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original Plain Vanilla ASCII or other
form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided
that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  assigned that payment to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
  Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60 days following
  each date on which you prepare (or are legally required to prepare)
  your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments should be clearly
  marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
  Foundation at the address specified in Section 4, “Information
  about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by email) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
  You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
  works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
  all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
  money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™
work or any other work associated with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
without complying with the terms of paragraph 1.E.8 or accepting
refund liability under paragraph 1.E.8, you must obtain permission in
writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the
owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as
set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, transcribe and proofread works not protected by
U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection.
Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the
medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a
copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or
damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that
perform unwanted functions.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunity to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



