The Project Gutenberg eBook of Marriage in Free Society

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Marriage in Free Society

Author: Edward Carpenter

Release date: July 11, 2012 [eBook #40209]
Most recently updated: November 27, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARRIAGE IN FREE SOCIETY ***




Produced by David Widger




MARRIAGE

IN FREE SOCIETY:

By Edward Carpenter

1894




MARRIAGE




I.

OF the great mystery of human Love, and that most intimate personal
relation of two souls to each other--perhaps the firmest, most basic
and indissoluble fact (after our own existence) that we know; of
that strange sense--often, perhaps generally, instantaneous--of long
precedent familiarity and kinship, that deep reliance on and acceptation
of another in his or her entirety; of the tremendous strength of the
chain which thus at times will bind two hearts in lifelong dedication
and devotion, persuading and indeed not seldom compelling the persons
concerned to the sacrifice of some of the other elements of their lives
and characters; and, withal, of a certain inscrutable veiledness from
each other which so frequently accompanies the relation of the
opposite sexes, and which forms at once the abiding charm, and the
pain--sometimes the tragedy--of their union; of this palpitating winged
living thing, which one may perhaps call the real Marriage--I would say
but little; for indeed it is only fitting or possible to speak of it by
indirect language and suggestion, nor may one venture to rudely drag it
from its sanctuary into the light of the common gaze.

Compared with this, the actual marriage, in its squalid perversity as we
too often have occasion of knowing it, is as the wretched idol of the
savage to the reality which it is supposed to represent; and one seems
to hear the Aristophanic laughter of the gods as they contemplate man's
little clay image of the Heavenly Love--which, cracked in the fire of
daily life, he is fain to bind together with rusty hoops of law, and
parchment bands, lest it should crumble and fall to pieces altogether.

The whole subject, wide as life itself--as Heaven and Hell--eludes
anything like adequate treatment, and we need make no apology for
narrowing down our considerations here to just a few practical points;
and if we cannot navigate upward into the very heart of the
matter--namely, into the causes which make some people love each other
with a true and perfect love, and others unite in obedience to but a
counterfeit passion--yet we may fairly, I imagine, and with profit,
study some of the conditions which give to actual marriage its present
form, or which in the future are likely to provide real affection with a
more satisfactory expression than it has as a rule to-day.

Yet the subject, even so limited, is one on which it is extremely
difficult to get a calm audience. Marriage customs (however much they
may differ from race to race) are at any one time and among any one folk
remarkably tenacious, being sanctioned by almost a violence of public
opinion; and as in the case of theology or politics, their mere
discussion is liable to infuriate people--perhaps from the very fact
that the subject is so complex and so deeply rooted in personal feeling.
Nevertheless--since alterations have to take place in these as in other
customs, and since, as many things indicate, we are moving towards a
distinct period of change in matters matrimonial--it would seem that the
more rationally we can survey these questions beforehand, the better.

It will probably be felt that certain present difficulties in the
marriage-relation are not merely casual or local, but are deeply
intertwined with a long series of historical causes, which have led up
to that exaggerated differentiation, and consequent misunderstanding,
between the sexes, of which we have spoken in a former paper.* Behind
the relation of any individual man and woman to each other stands the
historical age-evolved relation of the two sexes generally, spreading
round and enclosing the former on all sides, and creating the social
environment from which the individuals can hardly escape.

* Woman: Labour Press Society, Manchester.

As a rule they know but little of each other; society has kept the two
sexes apart; the boy and the girl have been brought up along different
lines; they hardly understand each other's nature; their mental
interests and occupations are different; and as they grow up their
worldly interests and advantage are seen to be different, often opposed;
public opinion separates their spheres and their rights and their duties,
and their honor and their dishonor* very sharply from each other.

* See Webster's Dictionary, which gives as one of the meanings of
 Honor, 
